# Models

This is an overview of the different models that have been develop to deal with time-related data. They can all be used to predict the future value of a univariate or multivariate dataset.

## ARIMA

* [Information on Amazon](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/forecast/latest/dg/aws-forecast-recipe-arima.html)
* [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autoregressive_integrated_moving_average)

Arima stands for **autoregressive integrated moving average**. This means it works using a moving average over the data. It's a good model when your data is non-stationary in terms of mean, but not in terms of variance. This problem, the not being able to cope with variance, is somewhat dealt with by applying a seasonal differencing.

The autoregressive-part means that the predicted value is partly predicted by using a regression on earlier versions of itself.

## DeepAR+

[Information on Amazon](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/forecast/latest/dg/aws-forecast-recipe-deeparplus.html)

DeepAR+ is again one of those models that is only implemented on AWS. It uses a recurrent neural network, meaning the neurons are sometimes connected back to themselves. They are thus a special case of neural networks, which is the focus of the Big Data course you'll be getting later in the curriculum.

The major difference between the other models is that a neural network needs to be trained. DeepAR+ will thus take some time for training and will need a lot of data (more than the actual data we want to predict), but once these conditions have been fulfilled it will outperform the 'normal' models like ARIMA and ETS.

## ETS

* [Information on Amazon](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/forecast/latest/dg/aws-forecast-recipe-ets.html)
* [And other information](https://machinelearningmastery.com/exponential-smoothing-for-time-series-forecasting-in-python/)

Exponential Smoothing (ETS) is a technique that can only be applied to univariate datasets. So if you have a list of ice cream sales during the previous summer annotated with the temperature, ETS will not be looking at the temperature (and will therefore not be your go-to option). If you have a list of cyclists accross a bike-highway however ETS is a valid option, as you only have the data of the time-series you are predicting.

It works by calculating a weighted average over all observations. These weights decrease exponentially over time.

## NPTS

* [Information on Amazon](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/forecast/latest/dg/aws-forecast-recipe-npts.html)
* [And other information](https://manjubnm.medium.com/amazon-forecastsnon-parametric-time-series-forecasting-6ac8217acbd)

Arima and ETS are parametric models. This means they calculate some parameters based on the input data and only need these parameters to predict the future data. That is nice as it is very transparent and requires less compute.

A non-parametric model though does not simply calculate these parameters but requires the current state in addition to some calculated parameters. This makes it harder to compute and requires way more data, but does tend to yield better results. DeepAR+ is a good example of a non-parametric model.

NPTS or Non-Parametric Time Series predicts by sampling from past values. (This sounds to easy to be true, which is in fact the case. The actual theory is way deeper, but also nothing that can be summarized in three lines. It does however give a good starting point which isn't technically incorrect.)

There are many variants of NPTS, like Seasonal NPTS, Climatological Forecaster and Seasonal Climatological Forecaster.

## Prophet

* [Information on Amazon](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/forecast/latest/dg/aws-forecast-recipe-prophet.html)
* [Information on github by facebook](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/)

Why the information by Facebook? Because Prophet is made by Facebook, but it has been made available publicly as open source software. It can detect multiple seasonal components in your data, for instance: the weekly trend and yearly trend for bikers on highways. It's also robust to missing data.

There is a [downside](https://medium.com/@cuongduong_35162/facebook-prophet-in-2023-and-beyond-c5086151c138) though: Facebook will continue to support Prophet but is no longer making it better. The real cutting edge can now be found in NeuralProphet. This doesn't mean however that Prophet is a bad model to use, it's still a very good model that will yield dependable results.

## PyCaret

So can we presume that our trusty PyCaret will predict our time series data using on of these models?

* [Well...](https://pycaret.gitbook.io/docs/learn-pycaret/official-blog/time-series-101-for-beginners)
* [Or maybe?](https://towardsdatascience.com/announcing-pycarets-new-time-series-module-b6e724d4636c)

It does, but the official 101 doesn't show it. Sounds like something we need to try out!